+++
date = 2026-04-05
+++

Thinking about using Cloudflare’s access feature (I think that’s what it’s called) so that I can add a content editor to my site which pushes changes to the git repo for the site. Cuz it’s very difficult to edit the site on mobile, even though it’s technically possible by using GitHub for editing, but it’s not an easy experience. I want it to be as easy for me as editing Wikipedia while keeping the site static. 
## Alternatives I’ve Rejected
Editing in vscode is great because I can customize it for writing blog posts, but sadly I can’t get that experience on mobile. Another idea is using [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md), since it has a plugin that adds Git support so I could theoretically use that for editing content. Couple problems with that: it uses YAML for Markdown frontmatter and [Zola](https://getzola.org) (the static site generator I use) uses TOML. Technically Zola “supports” YAML, but that is intended for making porting from other website frameworks easier and is not recommended. Also, YAML is loosely specified so who knows if properties in Obsidian notes will be parsed the same way by Zola. Additionally, the Git plugin for Obsidian doesn’t have great support on mobile because it has to use an alternative, less mature Git implementation implemented in JavaScript (which can be buggy AFAIK), rather than using the system install of Git (which isn’t available on mobile).

> [!note]
> I wonder if Obsidian plugins support WebAssembly? If so, the original implementation of Git could be used.
## Conclusion
Hopefully I can find a pretty good markdown-based editor so I can use that and avoid implementing it myself. The ideal would be to create something that feels Obsidian’s text editor which is like a WYSIWYG editor that also lets you edit the source of the page. Idk how that would work with inline HTML. I probably will start with just basic text editor for the page source probably. Honestly I don’t know how I would map a URL to a source file (because Zola isn’t made for this) so the editor probably couldn’t even have an ‘edit’ button on pages. Really if I wanted to properly do this, I would have to use a ‘real’ web framework like Astro (which I’m thinking of using in the case I have enough ideas like this that I want to properly implement). But the MVP I’m imagining is good enough for making mobile editing not suck :3
